---
publish_date: March 19, 2022
update_date: March 19, 2022
title: "Purpose, 2022"
author: Travis Frank
---
Three months ago, my mother left me a voicemail.  In classic proud-mom™️ fashion, she called to let me know she had been bragging about me to Hiro Yamamoto, the founding bass player of Sound Garden.  But alas, when she went to share my website with him- `A server with the specified host name could not be found.`

"Could you please fix that, so I have something to send people?"

## What even is a personal website?
I took my website down when I went on the job hunt for tech gigs.  I felt it sent the wrong signal; if I'm a software engineer, why does my personal website talk exclusively about music?

Then I started my gig, and I just...didn't put it back up.  I realized it was more than just the optics while interviewing that kept me from publishing again.  Proud mothers aside, what purpose does this site serve?  I had to answer that question first.

### Software is creative
In 2020, it was easy to reinvent myself.  Conditions (COVID lockdown) made it socially acceptable (and financially prudent) to drop the conducting career and try something different.  I've always been a technophile and knew the basics of programming, so what better trade than software?

Learning to code was completely addicting for me.  Solving algorithms was like finding a new favorite author: after the first taste, I devoured everything I could.  Leonoor told me I would mumble syntax in my sleep.  Programming really "clicks" for me.  It feels very similar to orchestration- equal parts technical skill and art.

So when my family and musical peers (inevitably) started asking if I was happy with my new career path, it was a resounding "yes".  In my experience, solving problems with code requires just as much creativity as music directing (probably more, if I'm being honest).

### Redesign
At Place Exchange, my colleagues kindly expressed interest in seeing this site.  "I need to redesign it, but it's coming!" was my canned response, but I failed to deliver on those words for over a year.  The "redesign" was more than a facelift- it was answering that question: what purpose does this site serve?

As a musician, this site was my brand and my portfolio.  Necessary for professional work.  Without the need to source work as a freelancer, is my site still a professional outlet?  What are my professional goals?  Where am I going?

Who am I?

In time, I discovered it wasn't the purpose of this *site* that eluded me- it is *my* purpose that is hazy.

### Wandering
I used to have a very strong sense of purpose: bring original musicals to life.  Make good art.  That purpose burned brightest circa 2016.  But as my community expanded beyond musical theatre, the possibilities opened up, and purpose gave way to wandering.

I'm grateful I wandered.  In my teenage years, I was laser-focused on building a theatre company and writing musicals.  What I've learned since is my early accomplishments came at a cost: the opportunity to thoughtfully consider what I want to do with my life.

After nearly five years, it's time for this period of wandering to end.  I wouldn't trade it for anything, but it's not how I want to live my life.  From my own experience, I know commitment and hard work is a prerequisite to accomplishing anything worth doing.  My first year in tech gave me the freedom to fully grapple with my purpose, and I'm ready to commit again.

## Purpose, 2022
My purpose is leveling the playing field for independent artists.

I started a theatre company because no one was giving me the opportunities I desired in theatre.  Art should be permissionless.

### This personal website has a purpose
Answering the question of *my* purpose made the purpose of this *site* obvious to me.  Besides hosting my music (for proud-moms™️), this is where I record my journey building software for independent artists.

Wielding technology in service of the community I come from invigorates me.  No matter the consequences of my choice, living the examined life is reward enough.