---
publish_date: March 18, 2022
update_date: March 18, 2022
title: "Identity, 2022"
author: Travis Frank
---
Three months ago, my mother left me a voicemail.  In classic proud-mom(tm) fashion, she called to let me know she had been bragging about me to Hiro Yamamoto, the founding bass player of Sound Garden.  But alas, when she went to share my website with him- `A server with the specified host name could not be found.`  "Could you please fix that, so I have something to send people?"

## What even is a personal website?
I took my website down when I went on the job hunt for tech gigs.  I felt it sent the wrong signal; if I'm a software engineer, why does my personal website talk exclusively about music?

Then I started my gig, and I just...didn't put it back up.  I realized it was more than just the optics while interviewing that kept me from publishing again.  Proud mothers aside, what purpose does this site serve?  I had to answer that question first.

## Software is creative
In 2020, it was easy to reinvent myself.  Conditions (COVID  lockdown) made it socially acceptable (and financially prudent) to drop the conducting career and try something different.  I've always been a technophile and knew the basics of programming, so what better trade than software?

Learning to code was completely addicting for me.  Solving algorithms was like finding a new favorite author: after the first taste, I couldn't stop.  Leonoor told me I would mumble syntax in my sleep.  Programming really "clicks" for me.  It feels very similar to orchestration- equal parts technical skill and art.

So when peers and family (inevitably) started asking if I was happy with my new gig, I gave a resounding "yes!"  After all, solving problems with code requires just as much creativity as music directing (probably more, if I'm being honest).